Golden Retriever
Golden retriever males are 23 to 24 inches tall and weigh about 65 to 75 pounds (29 to 32 kilograms). Females are about 21 to 22 inches tall and weigh about 55 to 65 pounds (25 to 29 kilograms).
Attributes
About
Personality
What to Expect
History
Attributes
Floppy ears (naturally)

Size
Weight
Male 65-75 lbs.
Female 55-65 lbs.
Height (at withers)
Male 24 in.
Female 22 in.

Coat
Length
Medium
Texture
Straight
Color
Golden of various shades

Care
Exercise
>40 minutes/day
Energy Level
Average
Longevity
10-13 yrs.
Needs
High

Traits
Barking

Snoring

Drooling

Grooming

Social Needs

Digging


Club Recognition
AKC Class.
Sporting
UKC Class.
Gun Dog
Prevalence
Common

Golden retrievers are very versatile. They’re known as bird dogs, family pets, service dogs for the disabled, and search and rescue dogs.
About
The golden retriever has a water-repellent coat that is wavy or flat and gold to cream in color. One of the most attractive features of this breed is the feathering on the neck, legs, thighs, underside and tail.

The dog's head is strong and broad. The ears are not very large, but they sit high on the head and hang just below the jaw line. The chest is deep, and the body is well balanced. Golden retrievers live about 10 to 13 years.

Personality
The golden retriever is even-tempered, intelligent and affectionate. Golden retrievers are playful, yet gentle with children, and they tend to get along well with other pets and strangers.

These dogs are eager to please, which probably explains why they respond so well to obedience training and are such popular service dogs. They also like to work, whether it involves hunting birds or fetching their guardian's slippers..

Golden retrievers are not often barkers, and they lack guard instincts, so do not count on them to make good watchdogs. However, some golden retrievers will let you know when strangers are approaching.

What to Expect
This breed likes to be active. Remember, golden retrievers are bird dogs at heart, so they love a good game of fetch or a swim. If exercise is provided daily, golden retrievers can adapt to any type of home, even if it is a city apartment.

Golden retrievers are considered average shedders. Brushing about once weekly will keep the coat looking nice.

History
In 1999, the golden retriever was the second most popular AKC breed. This ranking is no surprise, because the dog has many qualities that make for a perfect family pet. The golden retriever's roots are in the fields and waterways of Great Britain, however.

The golden retriever was bred to be a bird dog, particularly for hunting water fowl, and the breed resulted from crossing a number of other breeds thought to include spaniels, setters, and the Newfoundland (but not the Newfoundland we know today), and perhaps even a bloodhound. The combination created a hardy, strong swimming dog that could withstand cold water, track wounded game and deal with crippled birds.

Today, golden retrievers are not only good bird dogs and family pets; they also are popular as service dogs for the blind and disabled, and as search and rescue dogs and contraband detection dogs. Few dogs can claim this breed's versatility.
