Gundog
Retriever (Golden)
Intelligent, confident worker with gold or cream coat
Breed characteristics
Size
Large
Exercise
More than 2 hours per day
Size of home
Large house
Grooming
More than once a week
Coat length
Medium
Sheds
Yes
Lifespan
Over 10 years
Vulnerable native breed
No
Town or country
Either
Size of garden
Large garden
decoration
About this breed
The first Lord Tweedmouth is credited as the founder of the breed with a yellow dog bred from black Wavy Coated Retrievers crossed with the Tweed Water Spaniel. This mating produced four yellow puppies. Later additions to the root stock included the Bloodhound and the Irish Setter and the resultant yellow Retrievers became popular in the Border Counties. Eventually the breed was recognised by The Kennel Club as a “yellow” or “golden” Retriever in 1913. When the Golden Retriever Club was established in 1920 the official bred name was changed to the Golden Retriever.

Lord Tweedmouth and his Guisachan Retrievers are still remembered today and the Guisachan estate is occasionally used as a location for Golden Retriever shows, and is revered by breed enthusiasts as the home of the breed.

Read the breed standard
Images
The Gundog group
Colours
Images for this breed
Retriever (Golden) standing
Retriever (Golden) standing
Retriever Golden headshot
Health
Whether you're considering buying a Retriever (Golden) puppy or breeding from your dog, it's important to understand the health issues that may affect the breed and how they can be managed or avoided.
Health
Whether you're considering buying a Retriever (Golden) puppy or breeding from your dog, it's important to understand the health issues that may affect the breed and how they can be managed or avoided.




Pre-breeding health screening
Good Practice schemes and tests

We strongly recommend that breeders, at a minimum, conduct these tests before breeding, as evidence indicates these conditions are a significant concern in the breed.

DNA test for progressive retinal atrophy (GR_PRA2) - Find a list of tested dogs here
Elbow testing (for elbow dysplasia) using the BVA/KC Elbow Dysplasia Scheme
Eye testing (and gonioscopy for PLA) using the BVA/KC/ISDS Eye Scheme
Hip testing (for hip dysplasia) using the BVA/KC Hip Dysplasia Scheme
Best Practice schemes and tests

These tests address conditions that are still significant for the breed, though they may not be as critical as those listed under Good Practice. They might be less common or newly identified, and research is ongoing to determine their full impact.

To support the breed’s health, responsible breeders should ensure they complete all tests in both categories. Following our Best Practice guidelines means completing both the Good Practice and Best Practice tests for your breed.

DNA test for Ichthyosis (ICT-A) - Find a list of tested dogs here
DNA test for Progressive retinal atrophy (GR_PRA1) - Find a list of tested dogs here
This breed can be affected by conformational concerns, more information can be found here

Click here to find out more about The Kennel Club's health standard

Find out about a particular dog's results

Please visit our Health Test Results Finder to discover the DNA or screening scheme test results for any dog on The Kennel Club's Breed or Activity Register.

You can also view the inbreeding coefficient calculation for a puppy's parents, or for a dog you're thinking of breeding from.

Retriever (Golden) - Category 2
decoration
Particular points of concern for individual breeds may include features not specifically highlighted in the breed standard including current issues. In some breeds, features may be listed which, if exaggerated, might potentially affect the breed in the future.

Prior to 2014, the features listed below were derived from a combination of health surveys, veterinary advice, a meeting of The Kennel Club's group judges, feedback from judges at shows or consultation with individual breed clubs/councils via the breed health co-ordinators.

From 2014, the structure of Breed Watch allows for a greater involvement by judges in the reporting on and monitoring of the points of concern. Read more information about Breed Watch.

Points of concern for special attention by judges
Too fat
